README.md, before:

# Z shell configuration

We use Z shell extensively, on many kinds of systems. We use a Z shell configuration and directory naming conventions that help with compatibility, flexibility, and portability. This repo describes our conventions and has our typical starter setup for Z shell aliases, functions, settings, etc. In practice this works well with other Z shell tools, such as oh-my-zsh.

Contents:

* [zsh startup files](#zsh-startup-files)
  * [zsh locations](#zsh-locations)
  * [zsh directories](#zsh-directories)
  * [zsh loading](#zsh-loading)
* [zsh startup files: when they load and what they do](#zsh-startup-files-when-they-load-and-what-they-do)
  * [zshenv](#zshenv)
  * [zprofile](#zprofile)
  * [zshrc](#zshrc)
  * [zlogin](#zlogin)
  * [zlogout](#zlogout)
  * [extras](#extras)
* [Repo files](#repo-files)
  * [Conventions](#conventions)
  * [Install](#install)
  * [Install system-wide](#install-system-wide)
  * [Contribute your files](#contribute-your-files)


## zsh startup files

There are five startup files that zsh will read commands from in order:

```zsh
zshenv
zprofile
zshrc
zlogin
zlogout
```

Below, we explain more about each of these files, when it is loaded, and what it does.


### zsh locations

The default location for zsh system files:

```zsh
/etc/zshenv
/etc/zprofile
/etc/zshrc
/etc/zlogin
/etc/zlogout
```

The default location for zsh user files:

```zsh
$HOME/.zshenv
$HOME/.zprofile
$HOME/.zshrc
$HOME/.zlogin
$HOME/.zlogout
```

The convention is to use corresponding directories with names that end in `.d` such as `$HOME/zshenv.d`.


### zsh loading

To make zsh load everything we want, we edit our user zsh files such as `$HOME/.zshenv` and add a line like this:

```zsh
for file in \
        /etc/zshenv{,.d/**/*}(.N) \
        $HOME/.zshenv{,.d/**/*}(.N) \
do
        . "$f"
done
```


## zsh startup files: when they load and what they do


### zshenv

`zshenv` is sourced on all invocations of the shell, unless the -f option is set.

What goes in it:

  * Set up the command search path

  * Other important environment variables

  * Commands to set up aliases and functions that are needed for other scripts

What does NOT go in it:

  * Commands that produce output

  * Anything that assumes the shell is attached to a tty


### zprofile

`zprofile` is sourced in login shells. It is meant as an alternative to `zlogin` for `ksh` fans; the two are not intended to be used together, although this could certainly be done if desired.

What goes in it:

  * Commands that should be executed only in login shells.

  * As a general rule, it should not change the shell environment at all.

  * As a general rule, set the terminal type then run a series of external commands e.g. fortune, msgs, etc.

What does NOT go in it:

  * Alias definitions

  * Function definitions

  * Options

  * Environment variable settings


### zshrc

`zshrc` is sourced in interactive shells.

What goes in it:

  * Commands to set up aliases, functions, options, key bindings, for interactive use etc.


### zlogin

`zlogin` is like `zprofile`, except sourced after zshrc.


### zlogout

`zlogout` is sourced when login shells exit.


### extras

Some zsh setups provide more files that are not read by zsh:

  * `.zsh-update`: contains a timestamp of the most recent update

  * `.zshrc-e`: an example file; the Z shell convention is example files end in `-e`.


## Repo files

This repo contains our Z shell conventions for subdirectories and also our files that we like to use with multiple teams.

Notable subdirectories:

  * `zshenv.d/functions` is for functions.

  * `zshenv.d/programs` is for configuring environment programs via environment variables, such as `$EDITOR`, `$PAGER`, etc.

  * `zshenv.d/settings` is for Z shell settings, such as for completion, history, etc.

  * `zshrc.d/aliases` is for aliases, such as `g` for `git`, `now` for printing the current time, etc.


### Conventions

Alias conventions:

  * For an alias that is a one-letter shortcut, we use a naming convention for the file: the letter, an equal sign, and the result. For example, the file `g=git.zsh` is the alias that sets `g` to run `git`.

  * For an alias that is intended to launch a program, we use a convention of trying probable locations for the tool. For example, for the alias `firefox`, we look in order in `/opt` (e.g. typical for our custom installs), then on the path, then in the typical macOS location.


Environment program conventions:

  * `$EDITOR` for editing text files, such as `vi` or `emacs`.

  * `$PAGER` for showing text files, such as `more` or `less`.
  
  * `$FINDER` for searching text files, such as `grep` or `rg`.

  * `$CLIPPER` for copying text to a clipboard, such as `xclip` or `pbcopy`.
  
  * `$DATER` for showing dates and times, such as `date` or `gdate`.

  * `$JUMPER` for moving among directories, such as `jump` or `jumpdir`.


Date/time format conventions:  

  * We default to nanoseconds precision (not seconds precision), because we use subsecond precision on some of our systems.

  * We default to UTC timezone and the format "+00:00" (not "Z"), because this maximizes our compatibility with fintech systems and logs.



### Install

Clone:

```zsh
git clone https://github.com/sixarm/sixarm_zsh_config
```

Move the directories and files as you like, to wherever you want.

For example, to copy all the files into your user directories:

```zsh
cd sixarm_zsh_etc_files
cp -R zshenv.d/* $HOME/.zshenv.d
cp -R zprofile.d/* $HOME/.zprofile.d
cp -R zshrc.d/* $HOME/.zshrc.d
cp -R zlogin.d/* $HOME/.zlogin.d
cp -R zlogout.d/* $HOME/.zlogout.d
```


### Install system-wide

We prefer to install system-wide, making the repo files generally available for all system users.

We save the repo in our preferred directory `/opt`:

```zsh
git clone https://github.com/sixarm/sixarm_zsh_config /opt/sixarm/sixarm_zsh_config
```

Any system user can edit their own zsh files in order to source the repo files.

Example: you can edit your user file `~/.zshev` to add this line near the top:

```zsh
for file in \
        /etc/environment \
        /etc/environment.d(.N) \
        /etc/zsh/zshenv \
        /etc/zsh/zshenv.d/**/*.zsh(.N) \
        /opt/sixarm_zsh_config/zshenv.d/**/*.zsh(.N) \
        $HOME/.config/zshenv.d/**/*.zsh(.N) \
; do
    if [ -f "$file" ] && [ -r "$file" ] && [ -s "$file" ]; then
        . "$file"
    fi
done
```

Example: you can edit your user file `~/.zshrc` to add this line near the top:

```zsh
for file in \
        /opt/sixarm_zsh_config/zshenv.d/**/*.zsh(N) \
        $HOME/.config/zshenv.d/**/*.zsh(N) \
; do
    if [ -f "$file" ] && [ -r "$file" ] && [ -s "$file" ]; then
        . "$file"
    fi
done
```


### Contribute your files

If you have zsh files that you like and that are good for many people, then send them along. We welcome additions, and also welcome pull requests.

Commit message:

Add one-line loader script

README.md, after:

# Z shell configuration

We use Z shell extensively, on many kinds of systems. We use a Z shell configuration and directory naming conventions that help with compatibility, flexibility, and portability. This repo describes our conventions and has our typical starter setup for Z shell aliases, functions, settings, etc. In practice this works well with other Z shell tools, such as oh-my-zsh.

Contents:

* [zsh startup files](#zsh-startup-files)
  * [zsh locations](#zsh-locations)
  * [zsh directories](#zsh-directories)
  * [zsh loading](#zsh-loading)
* [zsh startup files: when they load and what they do](#zsh-startup-files-when-they-load-and-what-they-do)
  * [zshenv](#zshenv)
  * [zprofile](#zprofile)
  * [zshrc](#zshrc)
  * [zlogin](#zlogin)
  * [zlogout](#zlogout)
  * [extras](#extras)
* [Repo files](#repo-files)
  * [Conventions](#conventions)
  * [Install](#install)
  * [Install system-wide](#install-system-wide)
  * [Contribute your files](#contribute-your-files)


## zsh startup files

There are five startup files that zsh will read commands from in order:

```zsh
zshenv
zprofile
zshrc
zlogin
zlogout
```

Below, we explain more about each of these files, when it is loaded, and what it does.


### zsh locations

The default location for zsh system files:

```zsh
/etc/zshenv
/etc/zprofile
/etc/zshrc
/etc/zlogin
/etc/zlogout
```

The default location for zsh user files:

```zsh
$HOME/.zshenv
$HOME/.zprofile
$HOME/.zshrc
$HOME/.zlogin
$HOME/.zlogout
```

The convention is to use corresponding directories with names that end in `.d` such as `$HOME/zshenv.d`.


### zsh loading

To make zsh load everything we want, we edit each of our user zsh files, and add a load script.

Edit `$HOME/.zshenv` and add:

```zsh
for f in /etc/zshenv{,.d/**/*}(.N) $HOME/.zshenv.d/**/*(.N); do . "$f"; done
```

Edit each of the rest of the user zsh files, and add a corresponding load script.


## zsh startup files: when they load and what they do


### zshenv

`zshenv` is sourced on all invocations of the shell, unless the -f option is set.

What goes in it:

  * Set up the command search path

  * Other important environment variables

  * Commands to set up aliases and functions that are needed for other scripts

What does NOT go in it:

  * Commands that produce output

  * Anything that assumes the shell is attached to a tty


### zprofile

`zprofile` is sourced in login shells. It is meant as an alternative to `zlogin` for `ksh` fans; the two are not intended to be used together, although this could certainly be done if desired.

What goes in it:

  * Commands that should be executed only in login shells.

  * As a general rule, it should not change the shell environment at all.

  * As a general rule, set the terminal type then run a series of external commands e.g. fortune, msgs, etc.

What does NOT go in it:

  * Alias definitions

  * Function definitions

  * Options

  * Environment variable settings


### zshrc

`zshrc` is sourced in interactive shells.

What goes in it:

  * Commands to set up aliases, functions, options, key bindings, for interactive use etc.


### zlogin

`zlogin` is like `zprofile`, except sourced after zshrc.


### zlogout

`zlogout` is sourced when login shells exit.


### extras

Some zsh setups provide more files that are not read by zsh:

  * `.zsh-update`: contains a timestamp of the most recent update

  * `.zshrc-e`: an example file; the Z shell convention is example files end in `-e`.


## Repo files

This repo contains our Z shell conventions for subdirectories and also our files that we like to use with multiple teams.

Notable subdirectories:

  * `zshenv.d/functions` is for functions.

  * `zshenv.d/programs` is for configuring environment programs via environment variables, such as `$EDITOR`, `$PAGER`, etc.

  * `zshenv.d/settings` is for Z shell settings, such as for completion, history, etc.

  * `zshrc.d/aliases` is for aliases, such as `g` for `git`, `now` for printing the current time, etc.


### Conventions

Alias conventions:

  * For an alias that is a one-letter shortcut, we use a naming convention for the file: the letter, an equal sign, and the result. For example, the file `g=git.zsh` is the alias that sets `g` to run `git`.

  * For an alias that is intended to launch a program, we use a convention of trying probable locations for the tool. For example, for the alias `firefox`, we look in order in `/opt` (e.g. typical for our custom installs), then on the path, then in the typical macOS location.


Environment program conventions:

  * `$EDITOR` for editing text files, such as `vi` or `emacs`.

  * `$PAGER` for showing text files, such as `more` or `less`.
  
  * `$FINDER` for searching text files, such as `grep` or `rg`.

  * `$CLIPPER` for copying text to a clipboard, such as `xclip` or `pbcopy`.
  
  * `$DATER` for showing dates and times, such as `date` or `gdate`.

  * `$JUMPER` for moving among directories, such as `jump` or `jumpdir`.


Date/time format conventions:  

  * We default to nanoseconds precision (not seconds precision), because we use subsecond precision on some of our systems.

  * We default to UTC timezone and the format "+00:00" (not "Z"), because this maximizes our compatibility with fintech systems and logs.



### Install

Clone:

```zsh
git clone https://github.com/sixarm/sixarm_zsh_config
```

Move the directories and files as you like, to wherever you want.

For example, to copy all the files into your user directories:

```zsh
cd sixarm_zsh_etc_files
cp -R zshenv.d/* $HOME/.zshenv.d
cp -R zprofile.d/* $HOME/.zprofile.d
cp -R zshrc.d/* $HOME/.zshrc.d
cp -R zlogin.d/* $HOME/.zlogin.d
cp -R zlogout.d/* $HOME/.zlogout.d
```


### Install system-wide

We prefer to install system-wide, making the repo files generally available for all system users.

We save the repo in our preferred directory `/opt`:

```zsh
git clone https://github.com/sixarm/sixarm_zsh_config /opt/sixarm/sixarm_zsh_config
```

Any system user can edit their own zsh files in order to source the repo files.

Example: you can edit your user file `~/.zshev` to add this line near the top:

```zsh
for file in \
        /etc/environment \
        /etc/environment.d(.N) \
        /etc/zsh/zshenv \
        /etc/zsh/zshenv.d/**/*.zsh(.N) \
        /opt/sixarm_zsh_config/zshenv.d/**/*.zsh(.N) \
        $HOME/.config/zshenv.d/**/*.zsh(.N) \
; do
    if [ -f "$file" ] && [ -r "$file" ] && [ -s "$file" ]; then
        . "$file"
    fi
done
```

Example: you can edit your user file `~/.zshrc` to add this line near the top:

```zsh
for file in \
        /opt/sixarm_zsh_config/zshenv.d/**/*.zsh(N) \
        $HOME/.config/zshenv.d/**/*.zsh(N) \
; do
    if [ -f "$file" ] && [ -r "$file" ] && [ -s "$file" ]; then
        . "$file"
    fi
done
```


### Contribute your files

If you have zsh files that you like and that are good for many people, then send them along. We welcome additions, and also welcome pull requests.
